---
title: 'Psychedelics'
date: 
draft: true
tags: []
---

On a Saturday afternoon in Brooklyn, I ingested two grams of psilocybin mushrooms and wandered into the Brooklyn Museum. What follows is an account of what I remember, along with some reflections and commentary.

Sensory Changes
---------------

Entering the come-up of a psychedelic trip confronts you with an array of new sensory experiences, as plain and everyday inanimate objects, through no agency of their own, take on striking features and qualities. A close inspection of any object that has taken on new life in these circumstances would reveal – if such a sober examination were possible – that its fundamental geometry and characteristics have remained unchanged, and yet in the mind's eye, it presents itself as if a product of alien craftsmanship, the basic materials and building blocks of which are unknown to our planet.

During my come-up on psilocybin mushrooms, in an anxious moment when I noticed that the physical symptoms seemed to be outweighing the psychological, I glanced at the camera I held in my hand, only to find that it had suddenly morphed into an arrangement of contours and subtle surfaces completely unrecognizable to me. Where beveled panels and recessed grooves previously went unnoticed as mere visual artifacts in the blackness of the camera's body, they now strained against the silhouette of the device, as if forcing themselves off of its surface. The scattered assembly of white-colored letters and icons on the dials and buttons became a complex web of intricate geometry that enveloped the body of the camera like a skin disease. My initial reaction was one of fear, as if I had only then realized that I was holding a pint-sized mutant creature in my hands.

Returning to the lobby of the museum, it was now no question that I was in the throws of the trip. The dull marble floor and concrete sidewalk visible through the glass walls made for an apt canvas on which to gaze upon the rainbow-colored hammock chairs. The colors of the chairs glowed brightly in my visual field, and yet without the soft halo that typically encircles any light-emitting object. Relegating them to peripheral vision became an impossible task.

While on a psychedelic trip, the abundance of visual stimulation inspires a frantic desire to exhaustively scan your environment for the next marvel. On this trip though, I discovered that stopping to fixate my vision on a single scene can reveal new wonders. Stepping through the museum doors and out onto the sidewalk, I paused momentarily to fixate on a pair of apartment buildings across the street. The sun at that moment was about three quarters of the way through its journey across the sky, resting on a layer of clouds just beyond the tops of the buildings. After staring for no more than several seconds, the two buildings seemed to float away from their surroundings and become imprinted on the sky's gradient of light blue and azure. The glow of the sun intensified, casting ripples of orange and purple across the cascade of clouds, and after my mind managed to cobble together the fragments of this developing imagery into a single coherent picture, I found myself witnessing the formulation of a painting. Shifting my gaze slightly in any direction allowed me to quickly phase in and out of this realm.

Ego Dissolution
---------------

During the peak of my trip, an accompanying friend in a similar state as I remarked about feeling like an alien observer.

TBD
---

There seem to be two ways to experience psychedelics like LSD and psilocybin recreationally. You can leave your eyes open and wander into the world, allowing the deluge of sensory input to wash over the senses. Alternatively, you can close your eyes, don an eye mask if you wish, and turn inwards, opening your mind to the realms of consciousness and experience that await it.

In the first case, one feels compelled to prepare in advance an itinerary of stimulating destinations, by visiting a museum, a botanical garden, or any other place with an abundant supply of powerful and volatile imagery, such as an electronic music festival. These are places that we find stimulating even on a baseline level of mental sobriety, and when sensory activation is amped up 130%, we expect to find in these carnivals of the senses an even greater potential to be awestruck.

However, not long into the psychedelic trip, one realizes that under the influence of these substances, the threshold for wonder and awe is recalibrated so low that even the most mundane of environments have something to offer. A brick wall signals geometric insights to you in patterns of lateral and vertical movement. A potted plant with hanging vines and clusters of leaves becomes an alien species with pronounced nobs, points, and edges. A restaurant menu suddenly presents a literary challenge on par with a Dostoyevsky novel, if the words do not first consume your attention by separating from the page and taking flight in front of you.
